.. _hexformat:

====================
MicroPython Hex File
====================

When MicroPython is built, the compiler produces an
`Intel Hex <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intel_HEX>`_ file containing the
MicroPython firmware.
Additional data can then be added to this file to contain information about the
MicroPython version, or the Python code to execute on start-up.

The general memory layout used is:

- ``0x00000000``: Start of MicroPython firmware - up to 248 KBs
- ``0x0003e000``: Start of appended script (optional) - up to 8 Kbs
- ``0x100010c0``: UICR customer[16] register, start of MicroPython
  information - 28 bytes

.. note::
    If you append any data or modify the Intel Hex file, please ensure the
    addresses of the data stored progress in incremental order.
    If there is an address jump backwards DAPLink will fail to flash the file.

UICR format (micro:bit V1)
---------------------------

The User Information Configuration Registers (UICR) is a region of Non-Volatile
Memory available to store user-specific settings.
The first 128 Bytes are reserved, but we can use the other 128 Bytes to store
any arbitrary data.

MicroPython stores the following information, in little endian, starting from
the UICR customer[16] register:

- ``0x100010c0``: 4-byte integer with magic value ``0x17eeb07c``
- ``0x100010c4``: 4-byte integer with value ``0xffffffff``
- ``0x100010c8``: 4-byte integer with value ``0x0000000a`` (log base 2 of the flash page size, being 1024 bytes)
- ``0x100010ca``: 2-byte integer with value ``0x0000`` (start page of the firmware)
- ``0x100010cc``: 2-byte integer storing number of pages used by the firmware
- ``0x100010d0``: 4-byte integer with value ``0xffffffff``
- ``0x100010d4``: 4-byte integer with the address in the firmware of the version string
- ``0x100010d8``: 4-byte integer with value ``0x00000000``

Layout table (micro:bit V2)
---------------------------

A flash layout table is appended to the the hex file when building MicroPython
for a micro:bit V2.

The layout table is a sequence of 16-byte entries.  The last entry contains the
header (including magic numbers) and is aligned to the end of a page such that
the final byte of the layout table is the final byte of the page it resides in.
This is so it can be quickly and easily searched for.

The layout table has the following format.  All integer values are unsigned and
store little endian.

::

    0x00  0x01  0x02  0x03  0x04  0x05  0x06  0x07  0x08  0x09  0x0a  0x0b  0x0c  0x0d  0x0e
    
    ID    HT    REG_PAGE    REG_LEN                 HASH_DATA
    (additional regions)
    ...
    MAGIC1                  VERSION     TABLE_LEN   NUM_REG     PSIZE_LOG2  MAGIC2
    
    The values are:
    
    ID         - 1 byte  - region id for this entry, defined by the region
    HT         - 1 byte  - hash type of the region hash data
    REG_PAGE   - 2 bytes - starting page number of the region
    REG_LEN    - 4 bytes - length in bytes of the region
    HASH_DATA  - 8 bytes - data for the hash of this region
                           HT=0: hash data is empty
                           HT=1: hash data contains 8 bytes of verbatim data
                           HT=2: hash data contains a 4-byte pointer to a string
    
    MAGIC1     - 4 bytes - 0x597F30FE
    VERSION    - 2 bytes - table version (currently 1)
    TABLE_LEN  - 2 bytes - length in bytes of the table excluding this header row
    NUM_REG    - 2 bytes - number of regions
    PSIZE_LOG2 - 2 bytes - native page size of the flash, log-2
    MAGIC2     - 4 bytes - 0xC1B1D79D


This layout table is used to communicate the version of MicroPython and the
current memory layout to a Bluetooth client and enable `partial flashing <https://github.com/microbit-sam/codal-microbit-v2/blob/initial-docs-pf-and-memory-map/docs/bluetooth/MicroBitPartialFlashing.md>`_
(only updating the Python script, and keeping the existing version of
MicroPython in flash).

Steps to create the firmware.hex file
-------------------------------------

micro:bit V1
============

This applies to MicroPython for the micro:bit V1, the source of which can be
found here: `bbcmicrobit/micropython <https://github.com/bbcmicrobit/micropython>`_.

The yotta tool is used to build MicroPython, but before that takes place
additional files have to be generated by the Makefile in preparation for the
build, and additional data is added to the hex file after.

Running the ``make all`` command executes the following steps:

- The ``tools/makeversionhdr.py`` script creates the ``microbitversion.h`` file
  with macros containing build information
- Yotta builds the source and creates a bare hex file with just the firmware
- The ``tools/adduicr.py`` script adds the UICR to the bare hex
- The final hex file is placed in ``build/firmware.hex``
- The user can optionally append a script using ``tools/makecombinedhex.py``
  (or other tools)

micro:bit V2
============

This applies to MicroPython for the micro:bit V2, the source of which can be 
found here: `microbit-foundation/micropython-microbit-v2 <https://github.com/microbit-foundation/micropython-microbit-v2>`_.

This is a port of MicroPython to the micro:bit which uses CODAL as the 
underlying target platform.

Running the ``make`` command executes the following steps:

- Create build output directory, run cmake, and make sure codal libraries
  exist (via cmake).
- Build both ``libmicropython.a`` (from source in ``src/codal_port/``) and the 
  CODAL app (from source in ``src/codal_app/``).
- Run ``addlayouttable.py`` to add the layout table to the .hex file
- Create the microbit-micropython firmware as ``MICROBIT.hex`` in the ``src/``
  directory, which can be copied to the micro:bit.

Including a user script
-----------------------

User scripts are stored in the MicroPython filesystem and if a ``main.py``
script exists it is run when MicroPython starts. Additional Python scripts can
also be included and executed from the ``main.py`` file, or the REPL.

The `Python Editor <https://python.microbit.org>`_ uses
`microbit-fs <https://github.com/microbit-foundation/microbit-fs>`_ 
to create the filesystem and include it in the HEX file. The Python Editor must
add the filesystem to HEX files for MicroPython V1 & V2, and then combine both
into a `Universal HEX <https://tech.microbit.org/software/hex-format/#universal-hex-files>`_
file to ensure compatibility with both hardware variants.

Appended script format (Deprecated) V1
======================================

This method of appending the script to the end of MicroPython for micro:bit V1
is no longer used. Python files are now stored in the
`filesystem <../filesystem.html>`_ and ``main.py`` is the program entry point.

MicroPython checks the first 2 bytes at address ``0x0003e000`` for a magic
string to indicate if there is an appended script. If the magic string is
found, it will automatically execute the Python code stored there, unless there
is a main.py file stored in the MicroPython filesystem.

- ``0x0003e000``: 2 bytes "MP"
- ``0x0003e002``: 2 bytes, little endian integer for the length (in bytes) of
  the appended script (not counting this 4 byte header)
- ``0x0003e004``: Script stored as bytes, for MicroPython to decode using
  utf-8.
